## In the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Ever Merciful…

**QUESTION:** If I came for Hajj in the company of a group of ladies, without any mahram (male family member) of mine, while I am more than 50 years old, is my Hajj considered correct?

### ANSWER by Shaykh ‘Abdul-‘Azeez ibn Baaz (may Allah have Mercy on him):

It is not permissible for a Muslim lady to perform Hajj without a mahram (male family member). The Prophet (may Allah raise his rank and grant him peace) said, “No woman may travel without a mahram accompanying her.” [1]

Some of the scholars held that it is permissible to perform Hajj in a group of trustworthy women without any mahram, yet this opinion is disproven. What is correct is what the Prophet (may Allah raise his rank and grant him peace) said: “No woman may travel without a mahram accompanying her.” [1]

However, if it already occurred that she performed Hajj among a group of women, then her Hajj would still be valid, yet she must repent to Allah, as she has erred and incurred sin. So she must repent to Allah, have remorse, and not repeat the likes of this. The Hajj is still valid, if Allah so wills, because she has fulfilled the rites of Hajj, so it is valid even though it has with it this sin of violating the Sunnah, performing Hajj without a mahram. Allah is the one who grants success, and He, the Exalted and Most High, has the most extensive Wisdom, so she must repent from that.

Source: A question answered on the “Noor ‘alad-Darb” radio program, as found on the shaykh’s official website. [binbaz.org.sa] [MP3 Arabic] [screenshot]

FOLLOW UP QUESTION: What if she has no male family members, or none who can accompany her for Hajj?

### ANSWER by Shaykh ‘Abdul-‘Azeez ibn Baaz (may Allah have Mercy on him):

What is correct is that nothing (i.e. no Hajj) is due from her. However, this remains conditional. If a male family member is later available before she dies, whilst she is still [physically] capable, then she makes Hajj (i.e. as an obligation). If that does not become easily available, then there is nothing on her to do, and there is no harm on her [in not performing Hajj]. That is because the Messenger (may Allah raise his rank and grant him peace) forbade that a lady would travel without a mahram, [1] so she is excused in Islamic Law. If she dies after no mahram was ever available [to accompany her for Hajj], then nothing is due from her, and all praise is due to Allah.

**Source:** Another question answered on the “Noor ‘alad-Darb” radio program, as found on the shaykh’s official website. [binbaz.org.sa] [MP3 Arabic] [screenshot]

**Translated by:** _Moosaa Richardson (1444.12.11) for Bakkah.net_

### FOOTNOTE:

[1] Collected by al-Bukhaaree (3006) and Muslim (1341) from the report of Ibn ‘Abbaas (may Allah be pleased with him), with this wording. It was also reported with similar wordings by a number of other companions, collected in the two Saheeh compilations as well.

This entry was posted in Fiqh (Islamic Rulings), Hajj and Umrah, Original Articles, Q & A, Translations and tagged Bin Baz, fatwa, hajj, Ibn Baaz, mahram, Noor 'Alad-Darb, traveling, Umrah, women traveling, women's issues by admin. Bookmark the permalink.
